I'm going to bring in Muhammad alas he's
a media studies professor and political
analyst at the Doha Institute for
Graduate Studies good to have you with
us on Al jazer I want to talk about the
ripple effect that these protests that
we're seeing in the US are having
because we've just seen pictures about
the protests that are going on at C pole
University in France we've seen other
protests around the world as well all of
this I would imagine being driven by the
presence of social media the ability for
the students say in the US campuses to
be able to film what's going on and
immediately spread that across the world
talk to us about the impact that that's
having social media has been a has been
a GameChanger there's no question about
it uh mainstream media in the west and
if we want to look at the United States
in particular is notorious for adopting
the the sort of official line not
because there is official censor
censorship of course there isn't but
because uh these Western media
apparatuses like the American apparatus
or the British apparatus have what media
Scholars call structural constraints in
place right there are these kind of
filters that end up dictating what kind
of news uh is produced right this is why
you see such a sharp departure if you
watch CNN or if you read the New York
Times um from say what you get on
democracy now or in The Intercept or on
El jazer or in the Middle East eye and
other and other outlets not only of
what's happening in Gaza but even uh of
what's happening on the ground with with
the protest so students are able to use
social media uh and remember young
people are most likely to be plugged
into these social media sites like X
Instagram and Tik Tok so they're getting
one version of reality that departs
significantly from the reality that is
that is being depicted by mainstream
media they've galvanized support for the
Palestinian cause and it's not
surprising therefore to see all these
opinion polls that show it's young
people that are most likely to be
sympathetic with the Palestinians and to
be critical of Israel and Western policy
Vis Gaza because they are the ones who
are plugged into these social media
sites it's world presid Freedom day
we've been talking about that earlier on
obviously as we were reporting the
Palestinian reporters in Gaza being
awarded for their work there I want to
talk to you about World Press Freedom
generally you were referring
interestingly to the the structural
constraints within certain Western
organizations particularly when it comes
to reporting certain things but what
else are we seeing in terms of the kind
of constraints and repressions that are
being put on um the Press around the
world particularly at a time when it is
so important when people are protesting
in in Rel to some to the war in Gaza
when it comes to getting that message
out M well one of the really important
structural constraints that media
Scholars talk about is sourcing so if
you want to cover the news if you work
for the New York Times or the Washington
Post who do you end up talking to at the
end of the day you end up talking to
government officials well we know that
overwhelmingly uh United States
government officials for instance are
supporting uh Israel officially right
and they're also supported by APAC the
the biggest Lobby organization in the
United States the pro-israel uh Lobby so
that's one of the reasons why you end up
getting the kind of coverage that you
get it's interesting to know you're
talking about World Press Freedom Day
well reporters Without Borders released
their World Press Freedom uh uh index uh
for 2024 it's just released within the
last uh 12 or 14 hours and the United
States actually uh dipped pretty sharply
they're down to 55th in the world in the
Press Freedom rankings and in their
report it's pretty scathing reporters
Without Borders is talking about how us
officials are uh calling for the arrest
of journalists um they're talking about
the protest and they're talking about
how journalists have been barred uh from
covering the protests in some instances
they're talking about how journalists
have been assaulted and arrested so the
United States is actually taking a hit
here not only politically and in terms
of their Global standing but also in
terms of uh how they're viewed as a a
center for for Global journalism
Muhammad Al we appreciate you being with
us in Al thank you very much indeed